Add design document (#194)
OceanParcels/virtualship: design-doc.md

# Virtualship Design Document

> Document created as a result of [this discussion topic](https://github.com/OceanParcels/virtualship/discussions/187).

## Essence of Virtualship

> Virtualship interpolates hydrodynamical fields the way instruments would. Users can combine these observations into an expedition ("cruise"). Users can also deploy individual instruments in the flowfield, either as part of an expedition or independently, to compare against actual observations.

Reviewer: Suggestion to highlight the two types of users
```suggestion
Virtualship interpolates hydrodynamical and biogeographical fields the way instruments would. **Student Users** can combine these observations into an expedition (also known as a "cruise"). **Research Users** can also deploy individual instruments in these field, either as part of an expedition or independently, to compare against actual observations.
```

Author: Yes, I forgot to mention: Should we settle a bit here on terminology? "Expedition" or "cruise"?

### For Students or Researchers Planning an Expedition

A layer on top allows them to:

- Run an **expedition** that chains together **deployments** at different **stations**.

---

## Key Concepts

### Measurement

- A spacetime interpolation of a hydrodynamic or biogeochemical field.
- A set of measurements forms a timeseries output (serialised to disk as a zarr output).
  - In the case of students, this would be serialized with artificial errors to simulate real-world data and also be serialized in the original binary format of the instrument.

### Instrument

- A device that takes measurements. Two types:
  - **Underway-instruments**: Measure continuously during the expedition (e.g., Thermosalinograph, shipboard ADCP, and (to be developed) meteorology).
    - Conducted for the entirety of the expedition.
  - **Overboard-instruments**: Deployed at specific times (e.g., CTD, drifters, Argo, XBT, and (to be developed) gliders).
    - Deployed at stations during the expedition.

### Deployment

- A complete set of measurements for an overboard-instrument (from deployment to retrieval).
- Each deployment is executed independently of the ship's movement.
- Components:

>   - An instrument.

Author: Done in d46510d

  - A station.
  - A start time.

### Ship Track

- A set of line segments between stations where underway-instruments take measurements.
  - **Planned ship track**: Includes arrival and departure times at stations.
  - **Realised ship track**: Actual path taken.

### Waypoint

- A horizontal location with no associated time.
  - **Planned waypoint** - has no associated time
  - **Realised waypoint** - has an associated time (since the timing has been calculated from the ship speed).

### Station

- A waypoint where multiple deployments can occur. The ship does not drift horizontally while at a station.
- Features:
  - One horizontal location.
  - An associated time for deployment start.

>   - A configured time to stay at the location.

Reviewer: I thought we discussed that the ship would immediately leave after all measurements are completed (and wait at the next station if it arrives too early); but maybe I mis-remembered...

2. Encounter problems during the expedition

- Steps:
  - The planned ship track is known, validated[^1], and then the expedition is run.
  - Expedition is paused when a problem is encountered, and users can adjust their plans.
- Pros:
  - Problems can be flexible and based on the Parcels simulation (e.g., currents).
- Cons:
  - More complex to implement and test (need to run the code in a single phase).
  - Everything is a single particleset and fieldset, making kernels more complex, requiring splitting of the outputs into separate zarr files.
  - Students can't make decisions based on the data they have "collected".

We have decided for approach (1) for the timebeing. Down the line we may want to explore approach (2).

## Configuration Files

- **ship_config.yaml** and **schedule.yaml** can be updated to match the current structure.
- These can be consolidated into a single **expedition.yaml** file.

# FAQ

- How does this "Essence of Virtualship" above fit for biological oceanography? Do they also have a concept of 'instruments'?
  - For now let's focus on field data that is provided through Copernicus marine (down the line we might support other data providers).

---

> [^1]: Validate -> Make sure that ship track isn't on land, make sure that the ship track isn't unrealistic for the ship speed.

Reviewer 2: Further, is it important to be consistent with "validate" vs. "verify" phrasing? The design doc uses "validate" but the methods for running these checks in the code use "verify".
